In this lecture, you'll learn about EUI-64 addresses. Rather than manually configuring the full IPv6
address on a regular interface, it can generate the full IPv6 address for itself,
if you enter the interface that you want to do this on and the /64 network prefix that is to be used. The
host portion of the address will then be derived from the interface's
MAC address. And the MAC address is always guaranteed to be globally unique.
But a MAC address is 48 bits long and the host portion of an IPv6 address is 64 bits long so
to derive the host portion of the IPv6 address from the MAC address,
we need to make the MAC address the longer. We need to extend it from 48 to 64 bits.
The way that that is done is FF:FE is injected into the middle of it.
Also, the 7th bit is inverted. So looking at an example with our network here,
let's say that we haven't configured any IPv6 addresses anywhere.
And for an example, we're going to use the EUI-64 addresses on R1.
So on R1, we're going to go on to the fa0/0 interface and say that network prefix
there is 2001:DB8:0:1::/64 and tell the router to generate
an EUI-64 addres. It will then automatically generate an address for itself on that interface with
the correct network portion of the address.
And in the second half of the address, the host portion will be derived from the MAC address.
So in the example here, we're not going to use one at the end.
We're going to just have it automatically generated from the MAC address.
We'll also do that on interface fa2/0 as well, which is on the
2001:DB8:0:0::/64 network.
So looking at the commands, we go on to interface fa0/0 on R1 and we say IPv6 address
2001:DB8:0:1::/64. So that's the network portion of the address
that is going to be on the interface. And a space, and then we say EUI-64. And for interface fa2/0,
IPv6 Address 2001:DB8:0::/64 EUI-64. And the router will now generate IPv6 addresses
for itself on those interfaces. To check that it is working as expected,
we'll first of all, check the MAC address that was on those interfaces.
So with interface fa0/0, and we can see that the MAC address there is
CA01.2F24.0000.
If we then do a show ipv6 interface brief, I can see that the address on fa0/0 is
2001:DB8:0:1, which was the network portion of the address that we configured.
And when it's automatically configured the host portion derived from the MAC address, so that is C8,
because the 7th bit is inverted.
So it makes it C8 rather than CA and then 01, and then 2F, then the FFFE is injected,
and then 24:0.
You can see that it derived it from the MAC address and the same thing happened for interface
fa2/0 as well.
So that's how the EUI-64 addresses work.
If you configure this on a non Ethernet interface in the router like a serial interface, it will borrow
the MAC address from the first Ethernet port. And it's not recommended to do this.
Do not use EUI-64 addresses on your router interfaces, because if we look at the lab topology diagram here,
here is where we have configured manual address. So you can see
that R1 is using :1 at the end of its addresses. R2 is using :2.
This is going to make things much more logical and much easier for troubleshooting.
You don't want your routers to have random IP addresses, which is what's going to happen if you use
the EUI-64 addresses.
So if you're thinking, well, why tell us about EUI-64 if it's never used anyway?
It is useful is for your end hosts. If you've got an end host like a normal desktop PC that is going
to be running IPv6, you don't want to have to configure IPv6 addresses on every single end host.
So we can use DHCP for that like we do in IPv4 or we can use a feature called SLAAC which automatically
generates the address on the interface.
And we're going to cover that
in a lot more detail in a later lecture in this section.
OK, but for now, let's see how it configured it
on a Cisco router. So in the earlier lab demo, we configured the interfaces on the the link between R1
and R2. Let's now configure the interfaces between R2 and R3.
So on fa1/0 on R2 and on fa1/9 on R3, I will configure them with
an IPv6 address, but I'll use the EUI-64 rather than using a manually defined address.
So let's jump onto the lab.
I'm on R2 here. And if I do a show ipv6 interface brief, you see that.
OK, I've removed all of the IPv6 addresses for now.
That's fine.
We'll just do the interface facing towards R3 for now.
So I'll go to global configuration, make sure that IPv6 unicast routing is enabled and the subnet
on here is.. I'm speaking about in my diagram. I need to go to the interface first actually.
So let's go interface fa1/0 and it's IPv6 address 2001:DB8:0:2,
is the subnet ongoing link between R2 and R3.
Normally, I would put in the manually defined full IPv6 address here, but I'll use the EUI-64 here.
So at this point I'll say ::/64.
That is the network portion of the address on this link and then a space, and then EUI-64 and the
address will be automatically generated for me. And then I'll do a no shutdown on here and now if I
do a show interface fa1/0,
you can see there is the MAC address and if I now do a show ipv6 interface brief, then there is the
automatically generated EUI-64 address, which is based on the MAC address that is on that interface.
OK, I don't actually need to show you. You know that I could do the same thing over on the other side on R3
as well.
And then I would be able ping, I would have connectivity between R2 and R3.
But if I went on R3 and I wanted to ping R2, I would have to ping it by this great big, long
address here.
So don't use the EUI-64 addresses on your routers.
It would be much better to use the manually defined address
2001:DB8:0:2::1 or ::2.
It's much more memorable and it's easier for troubleshooting.
OK, so that was the EUI-64.
You will see more of it when we get to that SLAAC lesson coming up later in this section.